How much countries concentrate their populations in the largest cities varies across the globe. While nearly half of South Korea's population concentrates in the Seoul metropolitan area, Italy's population is far rather dispersed, with no single dominant metropolis. A well-known theory explains these differences through the timing of urbanization. It posits that late urbanizers concentrated more population in their largest cities because they could bypass the infrastructural, economic, and technological constraints that limited large city growth in early-urbanizing nations \cite{krugman1991increasing, bairoch1991cities, pumain2006evolutionary, fox2021conditions, lee2021economics}. 

However, cross-sectional data provide weak support for this ``late-urbanization advantage" theory. We argue that this weak signal is a statistical artifact that arises from the fact that static analyses overlook how urban hierarchies evolve. For long, a static viewpoint has dominated studies of urban systems, influenced by research on Zipf's Law. But more recent advancements argue for a more dynamic perspective. These advancements emphasize that urban hierarchies are not stationary, but change over time. This change is governed by the feedback between city size and growth. If larger cities grow faster, a positive feedback loop concentrates the population; if they grow slower, a negative feedback loop allows smaller cities to catch up. Over time, if size and growth relate in a non-neutral way, this dynamic reshapes the urban hierarchy. Now, countries began the process of urbanization at different historical moments, so this dynamic between size and growth has reshaped their urban hierarchies to different extents. A static perspective fails to take this into account, and hence its comparisons are systematically bias by temporal trends. Yet, taking these temporal dynamics into account is far from trivial because we do not know how the governing dynamic itself works—how size relates to growth at a specific moment, and this relationship evolves as a country urbanizes. The many studies of the former provide conflicting findings, and there are very few studies of the latter.

Data problems have caused this empirical impasse. Urban growth unfolds over centuries, necessitating long temporal series, while discerning patterns requires comparing many countries. Consequently, progress hinges on data that is comparable across both nations and time. Before the advent of satellite imagery, assembling such a dataset was unfeasible, as national data collection efforts are not designed to produce globally or temporally harmonized outputs.

In this paper, we show how the evolving relationship between city size and growth explains the weak empirical signal for the late-urbanization advantage. We use two new datasets constructed for comparability. In these datasets, we define all cities algorithmically using the same method: the City Clustering Algorithm (CCA), which identifies urban agglomerations by clustering adjacent "urban" grid cells. For our first dataset, which provides spatial coverage of the globe from 1975-2020, we applied this algorithm to existing grids from the Global Human Settlement Layer (GHSL) \cite{schavina2023ghsl}. For our second dataset, which provides temporal depth for the United States over 170 years (1850-2020), we first built the required grids from raw micro-level census data and then applied the CCA \cite{ruggles2024ipums, berkes2023censusa}. By integrating a cross-sectional perspective from the global data with a long-run longitudinal perspective from the US data, we show that the relationship between city growth and size is not static. Size is an advantage for growth during the early phases of urbanization, but this advantage diminishes as a country's urban system matures. When we account for this dynamic pattern, we find a positive relationship between late urbanization and urban concentration, a finding that supports the ``late-urbanization advantage" theory. 